---
title: "Number Systems"
parent: "Digital Circuits"
subject: "Computer Science"
type: "Semester"
id: 2402041218
---

The term _digital_ in digital circuits is derived from the way circuits perform operations by counting digits. A digital circuit operates with binary numbers, i.e., only in two states. The outputs of the circuit is either low $0$ or high $1$ in a **positive logic system**. In general, $0$ represents zero volts and $1$ represents five volts. If the situation is in reverse, it is known as **negative logic system**.

---

# Number System

The decimal number system $(0,1,2,3\ldots 9)$, is commonly used even though there are many other number systems like binary, octal and hexadecimal, etc. It is possible to express a number in any base or radix $x$. In the binary system, the base is $2$. In general, any number system with radix, $x$, having $m$ digits to the left, and $n$ digits to the right of the decimal point can be expressed as:

$$
a_mx^{m-1}+a_{m-1}x^{m-2}+\ldots+a_2x^1+a_1x^0\ .\ b_1x^{-1}+b_2x^{-2}+\ldots+b_nx^{-n}
$$

---

# Number Conversions

## Decimal to binary conversion

Decimal to binary conversion can be perfomed using the divisor-remainder method, by dividing the decimal number with 2 progressively, until 0 is achieved as a quotient. Further, all the remainder after each division is written in a reverse order, which forms the binary number.

#### Example 1: Convert decimal number `41` to binary equivalent.

Divisor-remainder method:

```
2[41]
2[20]-----1
2[10]-----0
2[5]------0
2[2]------1
2[1]------0
 [0]------1
```

Therefore the binary equivalent is: `101001`.

In case of numbers with decimal point, the part beyond the decimal point is multiplied with 2 untill a loop is achieved. The part of the result before the decimal point, is the binary part, and the part after is then multiplied with two and the process is repeated until a loop is achieved.

#### Example 2: Convert `41.56` from decimal to binary.

For the part before the decimal: `41`

```
2[41]
2[20]-----1
2[10]-----0
2[5]------0
2[2]------1
2[1]------0
 [0]------1
```

The binary equivalent for before the decimal point is: `101001`.

For the part after the decimal, `0.56`, we have:

```
(0.56)2=1.12-----1
(0.12)2=0.24-----0
(0.24)2=0.48-----0
(0.48)2=0.96-----0
(0.96)2=1.92-----1
```

The binary equivalent for the part after the decimal is: `10001`.

Therefore the binary equivalent for `41.56` is: `101001.10001`.

## Binary to decimal conversions

The binary number is first numbered starting from zero from right to left, fashion. Then binary digit is multiplied with 2 raised to the power of the position. Lets say, the binary is $b$, and the position is $n$, then the value at that position is:

$$
V=b\times 2^n
$$

#### Example 3: Convert `110010` from binary to decimal.

Firstly numbering the binary number:

```
Pos:  5   4   3   2   1   0
Num:  1   1   0   0   1   0
```

Therefore, the decimal equivalent is:

$$
\begin{align*}
D_e&=1.2^5+1.2^4+0.2^3+0.2^2+1.2^1+0.2^0\\
&=32+16+0+0+2+0\\
&=50
\end{align*}
$$

> **Octal number system**, is a base 8 number system, which has numbers from $0,1,2\ldots7$.
>
> **Hexadecimal number system**, is a base 16 number system, consisting of both numbers and digits, $0,1,\ldots9$, and $A,B,\ldots F$.

Just like binary, other number systems have the same conversion relations with decimal numbers. When converting from decimal, the divisor-remainder method is used, with the divisor being the base of the required number system. When converting to decimal, the positional number, is multiplied with base raised to the power of position.

---

# Exercise 1

1. Perform the following conversions:

   1. `224` [from base 10 to base 16]
   2. `B2D.F6` [from base 16 to base 10]
   3. `4C2.E6` [from base 16 to base 2]
   4. `10110.10110` [from base 2 to base 16]

2. Convert `4447` from octal to hexadecimal using the divisor-remainder method.

---

#### Example 4: Given a relation, $(244)_8=(301)_x$. Find the value of base $x$.

$$
\begin{aligned}
(224)_8&=(301)_x\\
\implies 2.8^2+2.8^1+4.8^0&=3.x^2+0.x^1+1.x^0\\
\implies 148&=3x^2+1\\
\implies 3x^2&=147\implies x=\pm 7
\end{aligned}
$$

Since, base cannot be $-7$, therefore the base is $7$.

---

# Binary Arithmatic

## Binary addition

Following is the chart for binary addition:

| First number | Second number | Result         |
| ------------ | ------------- | -------------- |
| 0            | 0             | 0              |
| 0            | 1             | 1              |
| 1            | 0             | 1              |
| 1            | 1             | 10 (0 carry 1) |

#### Example 5: Add the following numbers: $(26)_2+(22)_2$.

`26` in binary is: `11010`, `22` in binary is: `10110`.

```
    1 1   1   1
      1   1   0   1   0
    + 1   0   1   1   0
    -------------------
    1 1   0   0   0   0
```

Therefore, the binary equivalent for the result is: `110000`.

## Binary subtraction

Following is the chart for binary subtraction:

| First number | Second number | Result     |
| ------------ | ------------- | ---------- |
| 0            | 0             | 0          |
| 0            | 1             | 1 borrow 1 |
| 1            | 0             | 1          |
| 1            | 1             | 0          |

#### Example 6: Subtract `10110` from `11010`.

```

      1   1   0   1   0
    + 1   0+1 1   1   0
    -------------------
      0   0   1   0   0
```

Therefore the binary equivalent for the result is: `100`.

# Modern Binary Subtraction

Older circuits used differnet components for addition and subtraction. Newer circuts demand more functionality in lesser space. Therefore, subtraction is performed by adding the negative of the minuant, to the subtrahend.

For example, in older circuits, $54-45$ is performed normally by deducting $45$ from $54$. But in case of modern binary subtractions, the above operation will be performed as:

$$
\begin{align*}
  54-45=54+(-45)
\end{align*}
$$

Converting the minuant to negative form has two methods:

- 1'S Compliment
- 2'S Compliment

## 1'S compliment

To find the 1'S compliment of a binary number, invert it, i.e., convert 0 to 1 and 1 to 0. For example,

```
1001011: (1'S) = 0110100
```

Steps to perform binary subtraction using 1'S compliment:

1. Find the 1'S compliment of the negative number.
2. Add the numbers.
3. If carry appears, the result is positive. Add the carry with the LSB (least significant bit). Otherwise, if carry doesn't appear, the result is negative. In this case, 1'S compliment the result to get the true result.

#### Example 7: Perform `45 - 25`, using binary subtraction using 1'S method.

45 when converted to binary gives, `101101`. Now 25 gives, `11001`, but we will add a zero before the number, to account for the carry as the larger number has 6 binary digits. Therefore, 25 will be written as `011001`.

Now subtracting:

First finding the 1'S compilemnt of the negative number:

```
25 = 011001
(-25) = 100110
```

Second adding 45 and (-25):

```
45   :    101101
(-25):    100110
       ---------
Res  : |1|010011
```

Now since the carry appears, we will add the carry with the LSB of the result:

```
010011
    +1
------
010100
```

The final result is `010100`, which in decimal equivalent is `20`. The final result matches the answer.

#### Example 8: Perform `52-49+25` using binary techniques.

Conversion to binary equivalents:

```
52: 110100
49: 110001 :: (-45): 001110
25: 011001
```

Addition of 52 and (-49):

```
52   :    110100
(-49):    001110
       ---------
Res  : |1|000010
```

Addition of the carry to the LSB:

```
000010
    +1
------
000011
```

Addition of the first part with 25:

```
Res: 000011
25 : 011001
     ------
Res: 011100
```

Therefore, the final result is, `011100`, which in decimal equivalent is `28`, which matches the final answer.

In binary numbers:

> MSB (most significant bit) denotes sign, i.e., 1 for negative, and 0 for positive.

E.g.:

| Binary | Sign | 1'S | Decimal |
| ------ | ---- | --- | ------- |
| 000    | +    | 000 | +0      |
| 001    | +    | 001 | +1      |
| 010    | +    | 010 | +2      |
| 011    | +    | 011 | +3      |
| 100    | -    | 011 | -3      |
| 101    | -    | 010 | -2      |
| 110    | -    | 001 | -1      |
| 111    | -    | 000 | -0      |

As you can see, there are 2 representation of zero, i.e., +0 and -0, which is mathematically not possible. As a result this serves as a **major disadvantage of 1'S compliment**.

## 2'S compliment

In order to perform 2'S compliment, invert the binary number, and add 1 to LSB.

E.g.: The binary number is `1001`, then its 2'S compliment will be `0110 + 1 = 0111`.

Steps to perform binary subtraction using 2'S compliment:

1. Find the 2'S compliment of the negative number.
2. Add the two numbers.
3. If carry appears, the result is positive, discard the carry. If no carry appears, the number is negative, and 2'S compliment it to get the true result.

#### Example 9: Perform binary subtraction of `54 - 47`, using 2'S compliment.

Converting decimal numbers to binary numbers:

```
54   : 110110
47   : 101111
(-47): 010000
           +1
       ------
       010001
```

Now adding, `54+(-47)`:

```
54   :    110110
(-47):    010001
       ---------
Res  : |1|000111
```

We will discard the carry, and the final answer is: `000111`, which is equivalent to `7`, in decimal format.

#### Example 10: Perfom binary subtraction of `47 - 54`, using 2'S compliment.

Converting decimal numbers to binary numbers:

```
47   : 101111
54   : 110110
(-54): 001001
           +1
       ------
       001010
```

Adding `47+(-54)`:

```
47   :    101111
(-54):    001010
       ---------
Res  : |0|111001
```

Since the carry is zero, therefore the answer is negative.

Performing 2'S compliment to get the final result:

```
111001:: (2'S): 000110 + 1 = 000111
```

Therefore, the final binary result is: `000111`, and since the binary was negative, the answer is: `-7` in decimal forms.

> When both the numbers are negative and after binary addition, the MSB is `1`, consider the result negative irrespective of the carry. 2'S compliment the result to get the full result.

E.g.: `(-13)-11`

```
-13:: (2S) = 10010 + 1 = 10011
-11:: (2S) = 10100 + 1 = 10101
```

Adding:

```
-13  :    10011
-11  :    10101
       ---------
Res  : |1|01000
```

2'S Complimenting the result, we have:

```
01000:: (2'S) = 10111 + 1 = 11000
```

The final result is `11000` in negative, which is `-24`, and matches the desired result.

# Binary Coded Decimal

In BCD, each number is represented seperately by binary numbers. For 2-digited numbers, the digits are written in seperate decimal numbers.

| Decimal  | Binary   | BCD         |
| -------- | -------- | ----------- |
| 0        | `0000`   | `0000`      |
| $\vdots$ | $\vdots$ | $\vdots$    |
| 9        | `1001`   | `1001`      |
| 10       | `1010`   | `0001 0000` |
| $\vdots$ | $\vdots$ | $\vdots$    |
| 15       | `1111`   | `0001 0101` |

## BCD addition

Steps to perform BCD addition:

1. Convert decimal numbers to its BCD form.
2. Add the numbers using binary addition rule.
3. If the 4-bit sum is less than or equal to 9, its a BCD number. Else add 6: `0110`, to make it a valid BCD number.

#### Example 11: Add `248` and `173` using BCD addition.

Converting the numbers into BCD form, and adding

```
248: 0010 0100 1000
173: 0001 0111 0011
     --------------
Res: 0011 1011 1011
```

But, `1011` is more than 9, therefore adding it with `0110`:

```
Pre: 0011 1011 1011
Fix: 0000 0110 0110
     --------------
Res: 0100 0010 0001
     --------------
Dec: 4    2    1
```

Therefore the final result is: `0100 0010 0001`, when using BCD converted to decimal, gives: `421`.

## BCD subtraction

Steps to perform, BCD subtraction:

1. Convert both numbers to BCD form.
2. Generate the 1'S compliment of the minuent and add it with the subtrahand.
3. If 4-bit sum generate a carry, mark it. If EAC (end arround carry) generated result is positive, add the EAC with the LSB.

| C   | +ve    | -ve    |
| --- | ------ | ------ |
| 1   | `0000` | `1010` |
| 0   | `1010` | `0000` |

4. Follow the above table and add `1010` if unmarked. If EAC is 0, the result is negative, then 1'S compliment it and follow the above table and add `1010` if marked.
5. In the final addition, if any carry is generated, discard it.

#### Example 12: Perfom `127 - 73` using BCD technique.

Converting the numbers into BCD:

```
127  : 0001 0010 0111
73   : 0000 0111 0011
(-73): 1111 1000 1100
```

Adding `127` and `-73`:

```
127  :    0001 0010 0111
(-73):    1111 1000 1100
          --------------
Res  : |1|0000 1011 0011  (EAC present)
                      +1
          --------------
Pre:      0000 1011 0100
Fix:      0000 0110 0000
          --------------
Res:      0000 0101 0100
          --------------
Dec:      0    5    4
```

Therefore, the result is: `54`.

# Gray code

When arranging in binary code, the corresponding numebers might have more than one digit changed. This makes it difficult to predict, and identify anomalies. Hence Gray code was introduced, as in gray code, all corresponding numbers have only one digit that changes, thereby making it easier to understand anomalies.

| Decimal | Binary | Gray  |
| ------- | ------ | ----- |
| 0       | `000`  | `000` |
| 1       | `001`  | `001` |
| 2       | `010`  | `011` |
| 3       | `011`  | `010` |
| 4       | `100`  | `110` |
| 5       | `101`  | `111` |
| 6       | `110`  | `101` |
| 7       | `111`  | `100` |

Steps to convert binary code to Gray code:

1. Write the MSB as it is.
2. If the immediate next number is same, write 0.
3. If the immediate next number is different, write 1.

E.g.: `11010` in Gray will be:

```
B: G
1: 1 (MSB)
1: 0 (1-1)
0: 1 (1-0)
1: 1 (0-1)
0: 1 (1-0)
```

Gray: `10111`

Steps to convert Gray code to binary code:

1. Write the MSB as it is.
2. If the immediate next number is same compared to the previous number in the result, write 0, otherwise write 1.

E.g.: Gray code: `10111` in binary will be:

```
G: B
1: 1 (MSB)
0: 1 (1-0)
1: 0 (1-1)
1: 1 (0-1)
1: 0 (1-1)
```

Binary: `11010`

# Exercise 2

1. Perform the following operations using BCD:

   1. `735 - 42`
   2. `105 + 24 + 415`
   3. `204 - 614`

2. Convert the following from gray code to binary code:

   1. `10001`
   2. `11101`
   3. `01010`

3. Convert the following from decimal to gray code:
   1. `104`
   2. `211`
